Thinking in Systems: A Primer
Donella H. Meadows and Diana Wright

The answer clearly lies within the Slinky itself. The hands that manipulate it suppress or release some behavior that is latent within the structure of the spring. That is a central insight of systems theory.
NOTE: What is the central insight for sytems theory?
LOCATION: 170

hone our abilities to understand parts, see interconnections, ask “what-if” questions about possible future behaviors, and be creative and courageous about system redesign.
NOTE: What is the goal of systems thinking?
LOCATION: 267

This ancient Sufi story was told to teach a simple lesson but one that we often ignore: The behavior of a system cannot be known just by knowing the elements of which the system is made.
NOTE: What is the Stufi story and what does it tell us about systems?
LOCATION: 282

system must consist of three kinds of things: elements, interconnections, and a function or purpose.
NOTE: What are the three things a system is comprised of?
LOCATION: 296

A system is more than the sum of its parts. It may exhibit adaptive, dynamic, goal-seeking, self-preserving, and sometimes evolutionary behavior.
NOTE: Is a system a sum of its parts?
LOCATION: 313

Many of the interconnections in systems operate through the flow of information. Information holds systems together and plays a great role in determining how they operate.
NOTE: How does interconnections generally manifest?
LOCATION: 352

Purposes are deduced from behavior, not from rhetoric or stated goals.
NOTE: How dobyiu determine the behavior of a system?
LOCATION: 367

One function of a plant is to bear seeds and create more plants. One purpose of a national economy is, judging from its behavior, to keep growing larger. An important function of almost every system is to ensure its own perpetuation.
NOTE: What is one of the most important functions of any system?
LOCATION: 373

To ask whether elements, interconnections, or purposes are most important in a system is to ask an unsystemic question. All are essential. All interact. All have their roles. But the least obvious part of the system, its function or purpose, is often the most crucial determinant of the system’s behavior. Interconnections are also critically important. Changing relationships usually changes system behavior.
NOTE: How do you change a system and what is often the change required?
LOCATION: 411

A system stock is just what it sounds like: a store, a quantity, an accumulation of material or information that has built up over time.
NOTE: What is the foundation of a system?
LOCATION: 427

A stock is the memory of the history of changing flows within the system.
NOTE: What conceptually does the stock represent?
LOCATION: 431

Stocks change over time through the actions of a flow.
NOTE: How do stocks change?
LOCATION: 432

dynamics of stocks and flows—their behavior over time—you understand a good deal about the behavior of complex systems.
NOTE: What can you unersatnd about a system through its stocks and flows?
LOCATION: 454

Systems thinkers use graphs of system behavior to understand trends over time, rather than focusing attention on individual events. We also use behavior-over-time graphs to learn whether the system is approaching a goal or a limit, and if so, how quickly. The variable on the graph may be a stock or a flow.
NOTE: How do systems thinker think visually about behaviors?
LOCATION: 465

The human mind seems to focus more easily on stocks than on flows. On top of that, when we do focus on flows, we tend to focus on inflows more easily than on outflows.
NOTE: What bias do humans generally have?
LOCATION: 489

A stock takes time to change, because flows take time to flow. That’s a vital point, a key to understanding why systems behave as they do. Stocks usually change slowly. They can act as delays, lags, buffers, ballast, and sources of momentum in a system.
NOTE: What do we need to keep in mind about how impact of flows on stocks?
LOCATION: 503

Stocks allow inflows and outflows to be decoupled and to be independent and temporarily out of balance with each other. It would be hard to run an oil company if gasoline had to be produced at the refinery at exactly the rate the cars were burning it. It isn’t feasible to harvest a forest at the precise rate at which the trees are growing.
NOTE: Why is it important for stocks to make inflow amd outflows independent of each other?
LOCATION: 526

Everything we do as individuals, as an industry, or as a society is done in the context of an information-feedback system. —Jay W. Forrester
NOTE: What id Jay W Forrester say about system thinkers?
LOCATION: 548

In other words, if you see a behavior that persists over time, there is likely a mechanism creating that consistent behavior. That mechanism operates through a feedback loop. It is the consistent behavior pattern over a long period of time that is the first hint of the existence of a feedback loop. A feedback loop is formed when changes in a stock affect the flows into or out of that same stock.
NOTE: What is the first hint of a feedback loop and what is the general principle?
LOCATION: 552

This kind of stabilizing, goal-seeking, regulating loop is called a balancing feedback loop, so I put a B inside the loop in the diagram. Balancing feedback loops are goal-seeking or stability-seeking.
NOTE: What type of loops are goal seeking?
LOCATION: 602

Balancing feedback loops are equilibrating or goal-seeking structures in systems and are both sources of stability and sources of resistance to change.
NOTE: Aside from goal seeking, what other behavior does this type of feedback loop have?
LOCATION: 626

It is called a reinforcing feedback loop, and will be noted with an R in the diagrams. It generates more input to a stock the more that is already there (and less input the less that is already there). A reinforcing feedback loop enhances whatever direction of change is imposed on it.
NOTE: What type of loop leads to virtuous or vous cycles?
LOCATION: 642

approximately 70 divided by the growth rate (expressed as a percentage). Example: If you put $100 in the bank at 7% interest per year, you will double your money in 10 years (70 ÷ 7 = 10). If you get only 5% interest,
NOTE: What is the rule of 70 to esitimate doublin time?
LOCATION: 684

goal of all theory is to make the … basic elements as simple and as few as possible without having to surrender the adequate representation of … experience. —Albert Einstein,1
NOTE: What did Einstein say about the goal of theory?
LOCATION: 708

NOTE: What type of system describes a thermostat?
LOCATION: 726

The information delivered by a feedback loop—even nonphysical feedback—can only affect future behavior; it can’t deliver a signal fast enough to correct behavior that drove the current feedback. Even nonphysical information takes time to feedback into the system.
NOTE: What can information about a stock impact?
LOCATION: 774

stock-maintaining balancing feedback loop must have its goal set appropriately to compensate for draining or inflowing processes that affect that stock. Otherwise, the feedback process will fall short of or exceed the target for the stock.
NOTE: How should hyou adapt uour goal to for a single balancing feedback loop?
LOCATION: 789

A Stock with One Reinforcing Loop and One Balancing Loop—Population and Industrial Economy What happens when a reinforcing and a balancing loop are both pulling on the same stock? This is one of the most common and important system structures. Among other things, it describes every living population and every economy.
NOTE: What type of system describe the popuation and  economy?
LOCATION: 817

Complex behaviors of systems often arise as the relative strengths of feedback loops shift, causing first one loop and then another to dominate behavior.
LOCATION: 856

Are the driving factors likely to unfold this way? (What are birth rate and death rate likely to do?) If they did, would the system react this way? (Do birth and death rates really cause the population stock to behave as we think it will?) What is driving the driving factors? (What affects birth rate? What
NOTE: What are three basic questions to test whether yourbmodel is a good repreentation of reality?
LOCATION: 867

System dynamics models explore possible futures and ask “what if” questions.
NOTE: What types of questions do dynamic systems answer?
LOCATION: 889

Model utility depends not on whether its driving scenarios are realistic (since no one can know that for sure), but on whether it responds with a realistic pattern of behavior. Of
NOTE: What is the true measure of value of a model?
LOCATION: 901

A delay in a balancing feedback loop makes a system likely to oscillate.
NOTE: What causes oscillations in a system?
LOCATION: 1005

Economies are extremely complex systems; they are full of balancing feedback loops with delays, and they are inherently oscillatory.
NOTE: Why are economies constantly oscillating?
LOCATION: 1058

Two-Stock Systems A Renewable Stock Constrained by a Nonrenewable Stock—an Oil Economy
NOTE: What type of system can describe the oil economy?
LOCATION: 1061

In physical, exponentially growing systems, there must be
LOCATION: 1080

at least one reinforcing loop driving the growth and at least one balancing loop constraining the growth, because no physical system can grow forever in a finite environment.
NOTE: Why are all physical systems growth constrained?
LOCATION: 1081

A quantity growing exponentially toward a constraint or limit reaches that limit in a surprisingly short time. The higher and faster you grow, the farther and faster you fall, when you’re building up a capital stock dependent on a nonrenewable resource.
NOTE: What aspect of exponential growth should you be wary of?
LOCATION: 1130

Renewable Stock Constrained by a Renewable Stock—a Fishing Economy
NOTE: What is type of system describes  fish economy ?
LOCATION: 1169

Nonrenewable resources are stock-limited. The entire stock is available at once, and can be extracted at any rate (limited mainly by extraction capital). But since the stock is not renewed, the faster the extraction rate, the shorter the lifetime of the resource.
NOTE: What are nonrenewable resources limited by?
LOCATION: 1219

Renewable resources are flow-limited. They can support extraction or harvest indefinitely, but only at a finite flow rate equal to their regeneration rate. If they are extracted faster than they regenerate, they may eventually be driven below a critical threshold and become, for all practical purposes, nonrenewable.
NOTE: What are renewable resources limited by?
LOCATION: 1228

If the land mechanism as a whole is good, then every part is good, whether we understand it or not. If the biota, in the course of aeons, has built something we like but do not understand, then who but a fool would discard seemingly useless parts? To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering. —Aldo Leopold,1 forester
NOTE: What did Alo Lepold say about intelligent tinkering?
LOCATION: 1256

Consider the properties of highly functional systems—machines or human communities or ecosystems—which are familiar to you. Chances are good that you may have observed one of three characteristics: resilience, self-organization, or hierarchy.
NOTE: What are the propertiess of highy functional systems?
LOCATION: 1267

quickly.” Resilience is a measure of a system’s ability to survive and persist within a variable environment. The opposite of resilience is brittleness or rigidity.
NOTE: What is resiliency? An how does it difer from Talebs definition?
LOCATION: 1276

A set of feedback loops that can restore or rebuild feedback loops is resilience at a still higher level—meta-resilience, if you will.
NOTE: What are the properties of a resilient system?
LOCATION: 1280

Even higher meta-meta-resilience comes from feedback loops that can learn, create, design, and evolve ever more complex restorative structures. Systems that can do this are self-organizing, which will be the next surprising system characteristic I come to.
NOTE: What can self borganizing systems do differently tham rssilient systems?
LOCATION: 1281

There are always limits to resilience.
NOTE: +[[principle]]
LOCATION: 1289

Because resilience may not be obvious without a whole-system view, people often sacrifice resilience for stability, or for productivity, or for some other more immediately recognizable system property.
NOTE: Whatis bthe hidden cost of stability amd productivity?
LOCATION: 1299

Loss of resilience can come as a surprise, because the system usually is paying much more attention to its play than to its playing space.
LOCATION: 1320

Systems need to be managed not only for productivity or stability, they also need to be managed for resilience—the ability to recover from perturbation, the ability to restore or repair themselves.
NOTE: Aside from stability what should a system also manage?
LOCATION: 1322

This capacity of a system to make its own structure more complex is called self-organization.
NOTE: What is the output of a self organizing system?
LOCATION: 1339

Like resilience, self-organization is often sacrificed for purposes of short-term productivity and stability. Productivity and stability are the usual excuses for turning creative human beings into mechanical adjuncts to production processes. Or for narrowing the genetic variability of crop plants. Or for establishing bureaucracies and theories of knowledge that treat people as if they were only numbers.
NOTE: What is similar trade-off is made for self-organizing systems?
LOCATION: 1345

New discoveries, however, suggest that just a few simple organizing principles can lead to wildly diverse self-organizing structures. Imagine a triangle with three equal sides. Add to the middle of each side another equilateral triangle, one-third the size of the first one. Add to each of the new sides another triangle, one-third smaller. And so on. The result is called a Koch snowflake.
NOTE: What is a beautiful example of complex systems?
LOCATION: 1357

Here are some other examples of simple organizing rules that have led to self-organizing systems of great complexity: All of life, from viruses to redwood trees, from amoebas to elephants, is based on the basic organizing rules encapsulated in the chemistry of DNA, RNA, and protein molecules. The agricultural revolution and all that followed started with the simple, shocking ideas that people could stay settled in one place, own land, select and cultivate crops. “God created the universe with the earth at its center, the land with the castle at its center, and humanity with the Church at its center”—the organizing principle for the elaborate social and physical structures of Europe in the Middle Ages. “God and morality are outmoded ideas; people should be objective and scientific, should own and multiply the means of production, and should treat people and nature as instrumental inputs to production”—the organizing principles of the Industrial Revolution. Out
NOTE: What are examples of simple rules that lead to complex structures?
LOCATION: 1368

Systems often have the property of self-organization—the ability to structure themselves, to create new structure, to learn, diversify, and complexify. Even complex forms of self-organization may arise from relatively simple organizing rules—or may not.
NOTE: How do self-organizing systems work?
LOCATION: 1380

So he made his watches much faster and more efficiently than did Tempus. Complex systems can evolve from simple systems only if there are stable intermediate forms. The resulting complex forms will naturally be hierarchic.
NOTE: What state are sub system in complex systems?
LOCATION: 1410

Hierarchies are brilliant systems inventions, not only because they give a system stability and resilience, but also because they reduce the amount of information that any part of the system has to keep track of.
NOTE: What makes bierarchies briliant systems?
LOCATION: 1414

In hierarchical systems relationships within each subsystem are denser and stronger than relationships between subsystems.
NOTE: What makes hiearchies built from self-organizing principles efficient and resilient?
LOCATION: 1416

NOTE: When treating a problem you can often focus on the subsystem but when you want to prevent the problem form resurfacing it is important to consider the whole system
LOCATION: 1430

The original purpose of a hierarchy is always to help its originating subsystems do their jobs better.
NOTE: +[[hierarchy]]
LOCATION: 1439

When a subsystem’s goals dominate at the expense of the total system’s goals, the resulting behavior is called suboptimization.
NOTE: What happens when subsystems goals dominate?
LOCATION: 1445

To be a highly functional system, hierarchy must balance the welfare, freedoms, and responsibilities of the subsystems and total system—there must be enough central control to achieve coordination toward the large-system goal, and enough autonomy to keep all subsystems flourishing, functioning, and self-organizing.
NOTE: +[[balance]] [[hierarchy]]
LOCATION: 1451

Hierarchical systems evolve from the bottom up. The purpose of the upper layers of the hierarchy is to serve the purposes of the lower layers.
NOTE: How do hierarchal systems evolve and what purpose does bit serve:
LOCATION: 1454

The trouble … is that we are terrifyingly ignorant. The most learned of us are ignorant.… The acquisition of knowledge always involves the revelation of ignorance—almost is the revelation of ignorance. Our knowledge of the world instructs us first of all that the world is greater than our knowledge of it. —Wendell Berry,1 writer and Kentucky farmer
NOTE: What did Wendell Berry say about the acquisition of knowledge?
LOCATION: 1463

Everything we think we know about the world is a model. Our models do have a strong congruence with the world. Our models fall far short of representing the real world fully.
NOTE: What are the 3 truths of our use of models?
LOCATION: 1482

System structure is the source of system behavior. System behavior reveals itself as a series of events over time.
NOTE: What gives rise to behavior in a system?
LOCATION: 1527

Systems thinking goes back and forth constantly between structure (diagrams of stocks, flows, and feedback) and behavior (time graphs). Systems thinkers strive to understand the connections between the hand releasing the Slinky (event) and the resulting oscillations (behavior) and the mechanical characteristics of the Slinky’s helical coil (structure).
NOTE: What is the iterative nature of systems thinking?
LOCATION: 1528

NOTE: How does a slinky showcase system thinking?
LOCATION: 1531

Linear relationships are easy to think about: the more the merrier. Linear equations are solvable, which makes them suitable for textbooks. Linear systems have an important modular virtue: you can take them apart and put them together again—the pieces add up. Nonlinear systems generally cannot be solved and cannot be added together.… Nonlinearity means that the act of playing the game has a way of changing the rules.… That twisted changeability makes nonlinearity hard to calculate, but it also creates rich kinds of behavior that never occur in linear systems. —James Gleick, author of Chaos: Making a New Science
NOTE: What did James Gliek say about linearity?
LOCATION: 1560

Nonlinearities are important not only because they confound our expectations about the relationship between action and response. They are even more important because they change the relative strengths of feedback loops. They can flip a system from one mode of behavior to another.
NOTE: How does non linearity impact feedback loops?
LOCATION: 1586

Many relationships in systems are nonlinear. Their relative strengths shift in disproportionate amounts as the stocks in the system shift. Nonlinearities in feedback systems produce shifting dominance of loops and many complexities in system behavior.
NOTE: What is a good example of how non linearity leads to shift in dominance for a system? Hint: spur/fir/budworm
LOCATION: 1625

There are no separate systems. The world is a continuum. Where to draw a boundary around a system depends on the purpose of the discussion—the questions we want to ask.
NOTE: +[[boundary]]
LOCATION: 1688

It’s a great art to remember that boundaries are of our own making, and that they can and should be reconsidered for each new discussion, problem, or purpose.
NOTE: How can you avoid the trap of boundariess?
LOCATION: 1716

At any given time, the input that is most important to a system is the one that is most limiting.
NOTE: What input is most important to the system?
LOCATION: 1751

To shift attention from the abundant factors to the next potential limiting factor is to gain real understanding of, and control over, the growth process.
NOTE: How do you gain control of growth process?
LOCATION: 1768

Any physical entity with multiple inputs and outputs is surrounded by layers of limits.
LOCATION: 1772

Understanding layers of limits and keeping an eye on the next upcoming limiting factor is not a recipe for perpetual growth, however. For any physical entity in a finite environment, perpetual growth is impossible. Ultimately, the choice is not to grow forever but to decide what limits to live within.
NOTE: What is the ultmiate choice for growth?
LOCATION: 1774

There always will be limits to growth. They can be self-imposed. If they aren’t, they will be system-imposed.
LOCATION: 1783

When there are long delays in feedback loops, some sort of foresight is essential. To act only when a problem becomes obvious is to miss an important opportunity to solve the problem.
NOTE: When is foresight needed in systems thinking?
LOCATION: 1821

Because of what World Bank economist Herman Daly calls the “invisible foot” or what Nobel Prize–winning economist Herbert Simon calls bounded rationality.
NOTE: Who came up with bounded rationality?
LOCATION: 1844

We are not omniscient, rational optimizers, says Simon. Rather, we are blundering “satisficers,” attempting to meet (satisfy) our needs well enough (sufficiently) before moving on to the next decision.
NOTE: What does simon say about our rationale process?
LOCATION: 1851

To paraphrase a common prayer: God grant us the serenity to exercise our bounded rationality freely in the systems that are structured appropriately, the courage to restructure the systems that aren’t, and the wisdom to know the difference!
LOCATION: 1916

Understanding archetypal problem-generating structures is not enough. Putting up with them is impossible. They need to be changed. The destruction they cause is often blamed on particular actors or events, although it is actually a consequence of system structure. Blaming, disciplining, firing, twisting policy levers harder, hoping for a more favorable sequence of driving events, tinkering at the margins—these standard responses will not fix structural problems. That is why I call these archetypes “traps.” But system traps can be escaped—by recognizing them in advance and not getting caught in them, or by altering the structure—by reformulating goals, by weakening, strengthening, or altering feedback loops, by adding new feedback loops. That is why I call these archetypes not just traps, but opportunities.
NOTE: Why does Donealla call system traps archetypes?
LOCATION: 1943

This is the systemic trap of “fixes that fail” or “policy resistance.” You see this when farm programs try year after year to reduce gluts, but there is still overproduction. There are wars on drugs, after which drugs are as prevalent as ever. There is little evidence that investment tax credits and many other policies designed to stimulate investment when the market is not rewarding investment actually work. No single policy yet has been able to bring down health care costs in the United States. Decades of “job creation” have not managed to keep unemployment permanently low. You probably can name a dozen other areas in which energetic efforts consistently produce non-results.
LOCATION: 1959

If any one actor gains an advantage and moves the system stock (drug supply) in one direction (enforcement agencies manage to cut drug imports at the border), the others double their efforts to pull it back (street prices go up, addicts have to commit more crimes to buy their daily fixes, higher prices bring more profits, suppliers use the profits to buy planes and boats to evade the border patrols). Together, the countermoves produce a standoff, the stock is not much different from before, and that is not what anybody wants.
NOTE: Drug archetype
LOCATION: 1973

The results of policy resistance can be tragic. In 1967, the Romanian government decided that Romania needed more people and that the way to get them was to make abortions for women under age forty-five illegal. Abortions were abruptly banned. Shortly thereafter, the birth rate tripled. Then the policy resistance of the Romanian people set in. Although contraceptives and abortions remained illegal, the birth rate slowly came back down nearly to its previous level. This result was achieved primarily through dangerous, illegal abortions, which tripled the maternal mortality rate. In addition, many of the unwanted children that had been born when abortions were illegal were abandoned to orphanages. Romanian families were too poor to raise the many children their government desired decently, and they knew it. So, they resisted the government’s pull toward larger family size, at great cost to themselves and to the generation of children who grew up in orphanages.
NOTE: Policy resistance
LOCATION: 1981

The alternative to overpowering policy resistance is so counterintuitive that it’s usually unthinkable. Let go. Give up ineffective policies. Let the resources and energy spent on both enforcing and resisting be used for more constructive purposes. You won’t get your way with the system, but it won’t go as far in a bad direction as you think, because much of the action you were trying to correct was in response to your own action. If you calm down, those who are pulling against you will calm down too. This is what happened in 1933 when Prohibition ended in the United States; the alcohol-driven chaos also largely ended. That
NOTE: What is the counterintuitive way to deal with policy resistence?
LOCATION: 1993

Hungary, at the same time Romania was banning abortions, also was worried about its low birth rate—fearing an economic downturn could result from fewer people in the workforce. The Hungarian government discovered that cramped housing was one reason for small family size. The government devised a policy that rewarded larger families with more living space. This policy was only partially successful, because housing was not the only problem. But it was far more successful than Romania’s policy and it avoided Romania’s disastrous results.3
NOTE: What surprising did Hungary do to increase the birth rate?
LOCATION: 2001

Unlike Romania and Hungary, the Swedish government assessed its goals and those of the population and decided that there was a basis of agreement, not on the size of the family, but on the quality of child care. Every child should be wanted and nurtured. No child should be in material need. Every child should have access to excellent education and health care. These were goals around which the government and the people could align themselves.
NOTE: Population control
LOCATION: 2011

THE TRAP: POLICY RESISTANCE When various actors try to pull a system stock toward various goals, the result can be policy resistance. Any new policy, especially if it’s effective, just pulls the stock farther from the goals of other actors and produces additional resistance, with a result that no one likes, but that everyone expends considerable effort in maintaining. THE WAY OUT Let go. Bring in all the actors and use the energy formerly expended on resistance to seek out mutually satisfactory ways for all goals to be realized—or redefinitions of larger and more important goals that everyone can pull toward together.
NOTE: What is the trap of policy resistence and how do you let it go?
LOCATION: 2022

THE TRAP: TRAGEDY OF THE COMMONS When there is a commonly shared resource, every user benefits directly from its use, but shares the costs of its abuse with everyone else. Therefore, there is very weak feedback from the condition of the resource to the decisions of the resource users. The consequence is overuse of the resource, eroding it until it becomes unavailable to anyone. THE WAY OUT Educate and exhort the users, so they understand the consequences of abusing the resource. And also restore or strengthen the missing feedback link, either by privatizing the resource so each user feels the direct consequences of its abuse or (since many resources cannot be privatized) by regulating the access of all users to the resource.
NOTE: What is the trap for tragedy of commons and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2119

But in this system, there is a distinction between the actual system state and the perceived state. The actor tends to believe bad news more than good news. As actual performance varies, the best results are dismissed as aberrations, the worst results stay in the memory. The actor thinks things are worse than they really are. And to complete this tragic archetype, the desired state of the system is influenced by the perceived state. Standards aren’t absolute. When perceived performance slips, the goal is allowed to slip. “Well, that’s about all you can expect.” “Well, we’re not doing much worse than we were last year.” “Well, look around, everybody else is having trouble too.”
NOTE: What is the distinct quality of drift to low performance systems?
LOCATION: 2143

THE TRAP: DRIFT TO LOW PERFORMANCE Allowing performance standards to be influenced by past performance, especially if there is a negative bias in perceiving past performance, sets up a reinforcing feedback loop of eroding goals that sets a system drifting toward low performance. THE WAY OUT Keep performance standards absolute. Even better, let standards be enhanced by the best actual performances instead of being discouraged by the worst. Use the same structure to set up a drift toward high performance!
LOCATION: 2165

NOTE: What is the drift to low nperformance trap and how do you get out of it?
LOCATION: 2171

When the state of one stock is determined by trying to surpass the state of another stock—and vice versa—then there is a reinforcing feedback loop carrying the system into an arms race, a wealth race, a smear campaign, escalating loudness, escalating violence. The escalation is exponential and can lead to extremes surprisingly quickly. If nothing is done, the spiral will be stopped by someone’s collapse—because exponential growth cannot go on forever. THE WAY OUT The best way out of this trap is to avoid getting in it. If caught in an escalating system, one can refuse to compete (unilaterally disarm), thereby interrupting the reinforcing loop. Or one can negotiate a new system with balancing loops to control the escalation.
NOTE: What is the trap for escalation and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2218

Some people think the fall of the communist Soviet Union has disproved the theories of Karl Marx, but this particular analysis of his—that market competition systematically eliminates market competition—is demonstrated wherever there is, or used to be, a competitive market.
NOTE: What is the irony of competition without antitrust laws?
LOCATION: 2255

THE TRAP: SUCCESS TO THE SUCCESSFUL If the winners of a competition are systematically rewarded with the means to win again, a reinforcing feedback loop is created by which, if it is allowed to proceed uninhibited, the winners eventually take all, while the losers are eliminated. THE WAY OUT Diversification, which allows those who are losing the competition to get out of that game and start another one; strict limitation on the fraction of the pie any one winner may win (antitrust laws); policies that level the playing field, removing some of the advantage of the strongest players or increasing the advantage of the weakest; policies that devise rewards for success that do not bias the next round of competition.
NOTE: What is the trap of success to the successful and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2295

Addiction is finding a quick and dirty solution to the symptom of the problem, which prevents or distracts one from the harder and longer-term task of solving the real problem. Addictive policies are insidious, because they are so easy to sell, so simple to fall for.
NOTE: What are addictions and why are they so dangerous?
LOCATION: 2360

The problem can be avoided up front by intervening in such a way as to strengthen the ability of the system to shoulder its own burdens. This option, helping the system to help itself, can be much cheaper and easier than taking over and running the system—something liberal politicians don’t seem to understand. The secret is to begin not with a heroic takeover, but with a series of questions. Why are the natural correction mechanisms failing? How can obstacles to their success be removed? How can mechanisms for their success be made more effective?
NOTE: What is the guiding policy that intrevenors should apply to avoid the trap of addiction?
LOCATION: 2377

THE TRAP: SHIFTING THE BURDEN TO THE INTERVENOR Shifting the burden, dependence, and addiction arise when a solution to a systemic problem reduces (or disguises) the symptoms, but does nothing to solve the underlying problem. Whether it is a substance that dulls one’s perception or a policy that hides the underlying trouble, the drug of choice interferes with the actions that could solve the real problem. If the intervention designed to correct the problem causes the self-maintaining capacity of the original system to atrophy or erode, then a destructive reinforcing feedback loop is set in motion. The system deteriorates; more and more of the solution is then required. The system will become more and more dependent on the intervention and less and less able to maintain its own desired state. THE WAY OUT Again, the best way out of this trap is to avoid getting in. Beware of symptom-relieving or signal-denying policies or practices that don’t really address the problem. Take the focus off short-term relief and put it on long-term restructuring.
NOTE: What is the trap of shifting the burden to intrevenor and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2387

THE TRAP: RULE BEATING Rules to govern a system can lead to rule beating—perverse behavior that gives the appearance of obeying the rules or achieving the goals, but that actually distorts the system. THE WAY OUT Design, or redesign, rules to release creativity not in the direction of beating the rules, but in the direction of achieving the purpose of the rules.
NOTE: What is the Rule Beating trap and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2433

THE TRAP: SEEKING THE WRONG GOAL System behavior is particularly sensitive to the goals of feedback loops. If the goals—the indicators of satisfaction of the rules—are defined inaccurately or incompletely, the system may obediently work to produce a result that is not really intended or wanted. THE WAY OUT Specify indicators and goals that reflect the real welfare of the system. Be especially careful not to confuse effort with result or you will end up with a system that is producing effort, not result.
NOTE: What is the trap of seeking the wrong goal and what is the way out?
LOCATION: 2487

But Forrester goes on to point out that although people deeply involved in a system often know intuitively where to find leverage points, more often than not they push the change in the wrong direction.
LOCATION: 2532

Parameters become leverage points when they go into ranges that kick off one of the items higher on this list. Interest rates, for example, or birth rates, control the gains around reinforcing feedback loops. System goals are parameters that can make big differences.
NOTE: When do parameters become points of leverge? Why are the not generally?
LOCATION: 2593

You can often stabilize a system by increasing the capacity of a buffer.5 But if a buffer is too big, the system gets inflexible. It reacts too slowly. And big buffers of some sorts, such as water reservoirs or inventories, cost a lot to build or maintain.
NOTE: What leverage does a buffer provide?
LOCATION: 2614

Physical structure is crucial in a system, but is rarely a leverage point, because changing it is rarely quick or simple. The leverage point is in proper design in the first place.
NOTE: What is the best leverage for the physical design of a system?
LOCATION: 2634

A delay in a feedback process is critical relative to rates of change in the stocks that the feedback loop is trying to control. Delays that are too short cause overreaction, “chasing your tail,” oscillations amplified by the jumpiness of the response. Delays that are too long cause damped, sustained, or exploding oscillations, depending on how much too long. Overlong delays in a system with a threshold, a danger point, a range past which irreversible damage can occur, cause overshoot and collapse.
LOCATION: 2649

NOTE: How are delays points of leverage?
LOCATION: 2653

I would list delay length as a high leverage point, except for the fact that delays are not often easily changeable. Things take as long as they take. You can’t do a lot about the construction time of a major piece of capital, or the maturation time of a child, or the growth rate of a forest. It’s usually easier to slow down the change rate, so that inevitable feedback delays won’t cause so much trouble. That’s why growth rates are higher up on the leverage-point list than delay times.
NOTE: Why are delays a lower point of leverage?
LOCATION: 2653

The strength of a balancing feedback loop is important relative to the impact it is designed to correct.
NOTE: What is important in considering a balance loop as  point of leverage?
LOCATION: 2695

Reinforcing feedback loops are sources of growth, explosion, erosion, and collapse in systems.
NOTE: What are the surprising outcomes unchecked reinforcing loops?
LOCATION: 2715

Reducing the gain around a reinforcing loop—slowing the growth—is usually a more powerful leverage point in systems than strengthening balancing loops, and far more preferable than letting the reinforcing loop run. Population and economic growth rates in the World model are leverage points, because slowing them gives the many balancing loops, through technology and markets and other forms of adaptation (all of which have limits and delays), time to function. It’s the same as slowing the car when you’re driving too fast, rather than calling for more responsive brakes or technical advances in steering.
NOTE: Why is changing the rate of growth a more powerful point of leverage? How is analogous to driving a car?
LOCATION: 2721

It’s important that the missing feedback be restored to the right place and in compelling form. To take another tragedy of the commons example, it’s not enough to inform all the users of an aquifer that the groundwater level is dropping. That could initiate a race to the bottom. It would be more effective to set the cost of water to rise steeply as the pumping rate begins to exceed the recharge rate.
NOTE: How can providing missing informattion be a point of leverge?
LOCATION: 2747

They are high leverage points. Power over the rules is real power. That’s why lobbyists congregate when Congress writes laws, and why the Supreme Court, which interprets and delineates the Constitution—the rules for writing the rules—has even more power than Congress. If you want to understand the deepest malfunctions of systems, pay attention to the rules and to who has power over them.
LOCATION: 2770

The ability to self-organize is the strongest form of system resilience. A system that can evolve can survive almost any change, by changing itself. The
LOCATION: 2784

Self-organization is basically a matter of an evolutionary raw material—a highly variable stock of information from which to select possible patterns—and a means for experimentation, for selecting and testing new patterns.
LOCATION: 2796

The intervention point here is obvious, but unpopular. Encouraging variability and experimentation and diversity means “losing control.” Let a thousand flowers bloom and anything could happen! Who wants that? Let’s play it safe and push this lever in the wrong direction by wiping out biological, cultural, social, and market diversity!
LOCATION: 2813

Systems thinking for us was more than subtle, complicated mind play. It was going to make systems work.
LOCATION: 2913

This guideline is deceptively simple. Until you make it a practice, you won’t believe how many wrong turns it helps you avoid. Starting with the behavior of the system forces you to focus on facts, not theories. It keeps you from falling too quickly into your own beliefs or misconceptions, or those of others.
LOCATION: 2990

Starting with the behavior of the system directs one’s thoughts to dynamic, not static, analysis—not only to “What’s wrong?” but also to “How did we get there?” “What other behavior modes are possible?”
LOCATION: 3000

we all have to define a problem not by the system’s actual behavior, but by the lack of our favorite solution.
LOCATION: 3005

Our assumptions can no longer slide around (mental models are very slippery), assuming one thing for purposes of one discussion and something else contradictory for purposes of the next discussion.
LOCATION: 3013

Thou shalt not distort, delay, or withhold information. You
LOCATION: 3031

In fact, we don’t talk about what we see; we see only what we can talk about.
LOCATION: 3049

language and information systems of an organization are not an objective
LOCATION: 3051

they fundamentally structure the perceptions and actions of its members.
LOCATION: 3052

My impression is that we have seen, for perhaps a hundred and fifty years, a gradual increase in language that is either meaningless or destructive of meaning. And I believe that this increasing unreliability of language parallels the increasing disintegration, over the same period, of persons and communities.…
LOCATION: 3062

policy. It’s easier, more effective, and usually much cheaper to design policies that change depending on the state of the system.
LOCATION: 3115

all. Aim to enhance total systems properties, such as growth, stability, diversity, resilience, and sustainability—whether they are easily measured or not.
LOCATION: 3127

Systems are always coupling and uncoupling the large and the small, the fast and the slow.
LOCATION: 3217
